---
layout: post
title:  "Azure Data Fundamentals (DP-900)"
date:   2024-06-25 09:29:20 +0700
tags:
  - azure
categories: jekyll update
usemathjax: true
---

### Contents

- [Explore core data concepts](#explore-core-data-concepts)

____________________________________________________________________________________________________


> ## Explore core data concepts

### Different Data Formats

- **Structured data:** **fixed schema** - all data have **same fields** or **properties** - mostly **tabular** format

- **Semi-structured data:** has some structure, but will allow for **some variation** between instances - **common format** for semi-structured data is **JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)** 

- **Unstructured data** - e.g. **docs**, **images**, **audio** and **video** data and **binary files**

### Common File Formats

> #### Delimited text files
- It is a **comma-separated values (CSV)** in which **fields** are separated **by commas**, and **rows** are terminated by carriage **return/new line** 
- First line may include field names 
- Delimited text is **good** for **structured data** that needs to be accessed by a wide range of applications and services in a human-readable format
- E.g.

```
FirstName,LastName,Email
Joe,Jones,joe@litware.com
Samir,Nadoy,samir@northwind.com
```

Other common formats:
  - **Tab-separated values (TSV) and space-delimited:** in which **tabs or spaces** are used to **separate fields**
  - **Fixed-width data:** in which **field is allocated** a **fixed number of characters**

> #### JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)
- It is a format in which **hierarchical document schema** is used to **define data entities** (objects) that have **multiple attributes** 
- used for **both structured** and **semi-structured data**
- E.g.

```json 
// Customer1
{
  "firstName": "Joe",
  "lastName": "Jones",
  "address":
  {
    "streetAddress": "1 Main St.",
    "city": "New York",
    "state": "NY",
    "postalCode": "10099"
  },
  "contact":
  [
    {
      "type": "home",
      "number": "555 123-1234"
    },
    {
      "type": "email",
      "address": "joe@litware.com"
    }
  ]
}
```

> #### Extensible Markup Language (XML)
- It is a **human-readable format**
- XML uses **tags enclosed** in **angle-brackets (<../>)** to define elements and attributes
- E.g.

```xml
<Customers>
  <Customer name="Joe" lastName="Jones">
    <ContactDetails>
      <Contact type="home" number="555 123-1234"/>
      <Contact type="email" address="joe@litware.com"/>
    </ContactDetails>
  </Customer>
  <Customer name="Samir" lastName="Nadoy">
    <ContactDetails>
      <Contact type="email" address="samir@northwind.com"/>
    </ContactDetails>
  </Customer>
</Customers>
```

> #### Binary Large Object (BLOB)
- **All files** are **ultimately stored** as **binary data (1's and 0's)**, but in **human-readable formats**, bytes of binary data are mapped to printable characters **(ASCII or Unicode)**
- **Common data stored** as binary include **images**, **video**, **audio**, and **application-specific documents**

### Optimized file formats:

- **Avra:** **row-based format**. It was created by **Apache**. Each record contains a header (stored as JSON)  that describes the structure of the data (stored as binary info) in the record. An application uses the information in the header to parse the binary data and extract the fields it contains. Avro is a good format for compressing data and minimizing storage and network bandwidth requirements.
  
- **ORC (Optimized Row Columnar format):** **columnar data format**. It was developed by **HortonWorks** for **optimizing** **read** and **write** operations in **Apache Hive** (Hive is a data warehouse system that supports fast data summarization and querying over large datasets). An ORC file contains stripes of data. Each stripe holds the data for a column or set of columns. A stripe contains an index into the rows in the stripe, the data for each row, and a footer that holds statistical information (count, sum, max, min, and so on) for each column.

- **Parquet:** **columnar data format**. It was created by **Cloudera and Twitter**. A Parquet file contains **row groups**. Data for each column is stored together in the same row group. Each row group contains one or more chunks of data. A Parquet file includes metadata that describes the set of rows found in each chunk. An application can use this metadata to quickly locate the correct chunk for a given set of rows, and retrieve the data in the specified columns for these rows. Parquet specializes in storing and processing nested data types efficiently. It supports very efficient compression and encoding schemes.

EXPLORE DATABASES

Database: central system in which data can be stored and queried/dedicated system for managing data records

  1) Relational Databases: commonly used to store and query structured data - data stored in tables that represent entities, such as customers, products, or sales orders. Each instance of an entity is assigned a primary key that uniquely identifies it - and these keys are used to reference the entity instance in other tables.
  For example, a customer's primary key can be referenced in a sales order record to indicate which customer placed the order. This use of keys to reference data entities enables a relational database to be normalized.
  The tables are managed and queried using Structured Query Language (SQL), which is based on an ANSI standard, so it's similar across multiple database systems.

  
  1) Non-Relational Databases (NoSQL database): are data management systems that don’t apply a relational schema to data. 
  - Key-value databases: each record consists of unique key and associated value, which can be in any format

  
  - Document databases: specific form of key-value database in which the value is a JSON document (which the system is optimized to parse and query)

  - Column family databases: tabular data comprising of rows and columns, but can divide columns into groups known as column-families (holds a set of columns that are logically related together)


  3) Graph Databases: which stores entities as nodes with links to define relationships between them

  


















